In times of desperation, it is often difficult to see the positives in a situation. More often than
not, our survival instinct demands that we obliterate any obstacles in our path, without heeding
the potential consequences. However, I believe, using Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights and
early American history, that it is indeed possible to use these apparent disadvantages as a
means to improve yourself. The hero of Wuthering Heights, Heathcliff, was by any account, a 
man of humble origins. Not only was he an orphan without a last name, but he was also abused
and tormented by other children‐such as Hindley‐of his new household. Constantly frustrated
at every turn in life, Heathcliff as a boy could not marry Catherine‐who he loved‐partially
because of his lowly social status. After Catherine left to marry her new husband, Heathcliff
undertook a journey, in which he amasses a good deal of money and seemingly elevates his
place in society. Although these changes are superficial, Heathcliff, used the adversity facing
him as a boy as motivation to improve himself, to marry Catherine; thus his early obstacles
were turned into something good (at least for him). From Emily Bronte’s Wuthering Heights, it
is evident that obstacles can be transformed into motivation, a very positive emotion.
In the 1770’s, America was under the rule of a tyrant in England. Legislation, such as those that
were called the “Intolerable Acts” that forbid such practices as forming a militia in
Massachusetts, and the infamous “Stamp Act”, which was essentially a tax forced on Americans
to gain revenue for the British Empire, were passed continuously against Great Britain’s
colonies in America. The Quartering Act forced Americans to allow British soldiers to live in
their homes, which resulted in many fights and the situation was not good. However, the early
American political leaders used these dire times to rally the American people. The country,
incensed by British practices, joined those rebellious leaders, such as Patrick Henry, George
Washington, and John Adams, to fight in the Revolutionary War against a corrupt monarchy. If
the American people had not suffered through these indignities leading up to the Revolutionary
War, the United States of America probably would not exist today. Clearly, when one is faced
by obstacles at every turn, it is extremely difficult to try to twist negative experiences into
positive ones. However, if one takes the model shown by Heathcliff of Wuthering Heights and
America’s early political leaders, one can use these bad experiences to totally change
one’s life for the better.