It’s not the thievery.  It’s the goddamned theorizing.

When I started doing comedy – back in 1988 – I did a joke one night, at an unpaid open mike, that killed.  It killed.  I wasn’t used to having anything in my set, in those first few months of shows, get any response from an audience other than a hard blink and an impatient sigh. 

There’s a dopamine rush, for a comedian, when you cobble a thought out of thin air, when you arrange words not as a sentence but suddenly, as a joke.  A for-real, plucked-from-your-skull joke.  Something you created which, when you reach the part you want the audience to laugh at?  And then…holy shit!  They actually laugh?  That’s the spike in the vein that sets the compass for your life.

Well, I’d gotten a taste.  I wanted more. 

The only problem was, it wasn’t my joke.

In those early days, not only did I perform as many sets as I could get, I watched as much comedy as I could find.  The same way a writer has to both write, but also read.  Huge bites of both, if they want to hone their voice.  I’m sure this is the same in any creative field.

There was a lot of comedy to watch in the late 80’s.  Too much, really.  Endless cable shows, microphones in front of brick walls, geometric backgrounds, bland curtains.  But for me, a suburban kid who had limited access to the city and thus limited access to other comedians to watch and learn from?  The Basic Cable Jester Parade was boot camp, college and conservatory, all at the same time. 

And, in watching the endless procession of amazing comedians on TV at that time, as well as working a day job and going out at night to do sets, I lived on three hours sleep a day – about eighteen hours, total, per week.  And you combine that sleep deprivation with my consuming ambition, plus the fact that the few waking hours I had at home were spent chomping down all of the televised stand-up I could hunt down? 

Well, I stole a joke.  Not consciously.  I heard something I found hilarious, mis-remembered it as an inspiration of my own, and then said it onstage.  And got big laughs.

Here it is:  “Whenever I’m sitting on a bus, and someone asks me if the seat next to me is free, I have an answer that guarantees no one will want that seat.  I look up and smile and say, ‘No one but…The Lord.”

Huge laugh on that one.  Pow!  Bigger than anything else in my set at the time, that’s for sure.

I came off stage and Blaine Capatch, a comedian friend of mine who’s a never-miss machine gun in terms of quantity and quality when it comes to jokes, took me aside and said, “That’s a Carol Leifer joke, man.”

It hit me just as soon as he’d said it.  He was right.  It was a Carol Leifer joke.  Pretty much word-for-word.  I’d seen her do it on A&E’s Evening at the Improv one night and then, during a Diet Coke and Cup o’ Noodles lunch at the law firm I was clerking at, I jotted it down in my notebook as if I’d written it.  And then went up onstage and killed with it.  At two in the morning, for probably 17 people and no money.  But what the fuck did I care at that point?  All I was chasing, as an open miker, was the rush – and, I was hoping, paid work.  Regularly killing during my sets would lead to that work, wouldn’t it?

In the exact moment after I’d realized that what Blaine said was true, that I’d cribbed a laugh from someone else’s creativity and inspiration, my ego kicked in.  And, I mean, my real ego.  Not ego’s sociopathic cousin, hubris, which would have made me defensive, aggressive and ultimately rationalize the theft.  No, the good kind of ego, the kind that wanted success and fame and praise on my own merits, no matter how long it took. 

I said, “Oh shit, you’re right.  I didn’t even realize I was doing that.  Goddamit…”

“Eh.  You do it all the time when you’re starting out.  Everyone does.  You can’t avoid it.  Just don’t make it a habit,” said Blaine, and headed back into the showroom to watch someone destroy, probably, with a rap song about farting.  It was the 80’s.

Now, let’s zoom ahead 15 years later.  I was recording my first album at The 40 Watt in Athens, Georgia.  It was a boozy, swooping 2 ½ hour show that I edited down to 89 minutes for the album release.  I had a lot of fun doing it.  I performed it in front of the kind of dream crowd that’s not only excited for your polished, crafted routines, but also the unexpected blind alleys of thought, the in-the-moment stage notions that die gorgeously from their own heat, and the jokes that are funnier for being audacious and suggestive rather than structured, logical and clear. 

Within that 140 minutes were a couple of jokes I had just started working on, but had no real ending (and, to be honest, no middle, either).  One of them was about microwaveable Hot Pockets.  All I really had was the idea that the word “Hot Pockets” was phonetically perfect to be said by a fat person.  It got a solid laugh and, as I leapt from that premise’s unfinished scaffolding onto the supremely appointed edifice of an actual joke I’d bothered to finish, I made a note in my head to not put the Hot Pockets on the finished album, but to save the concept to develop for the next one. 

After the show, at a house party with some friends and the recording crew, someone pointed out to me that Jim Gaffigan had a bit about Hot Pockets, and that it was amazing.

I said, “Yeah, but, uh, I mean, it’s parallel thought on my part.  I haven’t heard his take…”

My friend said, “Oh, I know.  I’m just saying, it’s something he’s kind of famous for.  You should give it a listen.  I know there are a lot of people out there who don’t know how comedy works who’ll think you maybe lifted it.  You know how people are.”

I went online later that night and listened to Jim’s Hot Pockets bit.  It’s amazing.  One of those perfectly realized, no-meat-left-on-the-bone-of-the-idea jokes that also so perfectly captures the personality and intelligence of the teller that it becomes a part of how you think of them.  Martin Scorsese and Rolling Stones songs in films.  Salvador Dali and melting watches, desert landscapes.  Carson McCullers and that specific kind of insanity that festers in the Southern heat and haze.  You can tread into these territories, play with these symbols if you want to.  But you’ll just end up being compared to someone else – someone who blazed the trail you’re clumsily walking.

My ego, again.  This was my first album.  I didn’t want to be compared.  To anyone or anything.  Not even a comedian as amazing as Jim Gaffigan.  Just like the 19 year-old version of me, who’d wielded a joke that wasn’t his at an open mike and crushed with it, I wanted any success or fame I had coming to be my own.  To be built on a bedrock of my own creativity and risk. 

You can still hear the unfinished Hot Pockets joke, by the way, on the uncut version of that album.  It’s probably on YouTube.  No need to spend your money on it.  It’s a pallid, boneless reminder that not all parallel thought is equal.  In fact, it rarely is. 

Know what else is rare?  Especially in my profession?  People outside of my profession who know the difference.

Okay, now I have to tell you one more quick story before I bring this back around to my original gripe.  About how it’s not the thievery, it’s the theorizing.  Ready?

Okay, so now it’s a few years after Blaine pointed out to me that the “empty seat on the bus joke” I’d done at the open mike belonged to Carol Leifer.  Early 90’s.  Blaine and I are working professionals now, emceeing shows around the D.C. and Baltimore area.  Whereas I, at this point, had barely enough original material to actually do 15 minutes, Blaine had that amount many times over.  In fact, he had enough material to do more than an hour at the point.  He just didn’t have the name or draw, yet, to headline.

And another young comedian we both knew – who had started featuring, which meant doing 30 minute sets after the emcee but before the headliner – started stealing Blaine’s material.  Not a joke here or a line there.  Huge, sprawling chunks of Blaine’s act, which ballooned the material he had from about ten minutes to more than half an hour.  And he used it to feature – to make more money, to have an easier time in front of an audience that had been warmed up by an emcee like me or Blaine, to get even more gigs.  He made no attempt to hide what he was doing and, if I remember correctly, even did some of it right in front of Blaine at a show in Baltimore. 

Blaine, ever more Zen than me, even at that young age, politely confronted the comedian and asked him to stop.  “That’s my stuff, man.  Could you not do it, please?”

The other comedian wasn’t angry or defensive.  He was, incredibly, confused.

“But I’m starting to get feature sets.  I don’t have 30 minutes of material.  You’ve got more than 30 minutes.  And you’re not getting feature sets.”  The young comedian explained this Blaine like he was explaining the concept of the Tooth Fairy to a 3 year-old.

Blaine said, “But you’re only getting those feature sets because of my material.  You wouldn’t have enough to fill a half hour unless you stole from me.”

“Yeah, I know,” explained the comedian, patiently.  “You ain’t out there working to get feature sets.  You’re just writing all this material and then just doing emcee sets.  You ain’t featuring full-time like me, so I need that material.  You’re not using it featuring.”

So there you go.  Blaine got to watch his work benefit someone else – someone dumber, and less creative but, fatally, more ambitious and shameless than him.  I’d love to tell you that the other club owners stopped hiring the thief but…nope.  He made people laugh while the audience bought drinks and mozzarella sticks.  Most comedy club owners back then – and a few, still, now – are in the Food and Beverage Industry, not the Creativity and Honor Industry.  Most audiences cleave to the former as well. What could Blaine and I do, still at the dawn of our careers?  Two emcees struggling to find an audience and get work?  We had zero power to stop anyone stealing anything.  We just had to write more, work harder, out-create the little fucker.

Don’t worry – this story has a happy ending.  Blaine and I eventually moved west.  So did the thief.  But when it came time for him to make the transition to television, to movies, to big-time fame and success?  He had nothing.  And, without going into details, he flamed out, rather spectacularly, on national television.  Like, spectacularly.  It was gorgeous for Blaine and I to watch.  By that point we’d built solid careers for ourselves and when Kid Thief’s career hit the killing floor?  It drained away through the sluice gate.  I’ve never heard from him since.  Kelly Oxford wrote something, during this latest joke thief debacle, about how the stealers and joke-thieves can often get themselves through the highest doors only to find, when they’re at the top and people want to hear their ideas…they’ve got nothing.  Kill floor.  Sluice gate.  Oblivion.  I don’t need to name names here.  We’ve seen it happen.  It’ll happen again.   It’s always fun when it does.

So why the wordy preamble, all of these seemingly random examples from my past?  I didn’t even mention the ones I’ve gone up against recently – the Bland Midwestern Actor who performed huge chunks of my act – plus Dave Attell’s, Louie CK’s and Todd Barry’s (and, when confronted, claimed to have written all of those jokes for us) or the Columbia Valedictorian who, in his graduation speech, passed of a joke of mine – a verbatim personal anecdote – as if it happened to him.  Or, of course, the latest in my Rogue’s Gallery of Lameness, the Sticky-Fingered Youth Pastor of Twitter?  The God-loving, Commandment-slinging sky pilot who “just wanted to make people laugh” – and wanted to so badly that he flat-out slapped his name on other people’s Tweets and sent them out as his own?  He didn’t even steal a joke from me – just from all of my friends, most of them up-and-coming talents writing jokes on Twitter, trying to make a name for themselves and build a career – only without the followers and thus without the juice to initially bring him down.  And then, well…  The endorphin rush.  That feeling, the same one I had when I unwittingly used Carol Leifer’s joke.  His rush came from the execution, not the creation.  And like the truly talentless, he had to keep it going.  Bigger and bigger highs.  Deeper, dangerous doses.  And so he lifted from Rob Delaney, April Richardson and, most idiotically of all, Kelly Oxford. 

Boom.  Busted.

Oh well.  He got a book deal out of it.  And paid speaking engagements at, ironically, religious conferences that I’m certain hold the 7th or 8th Commandment (depending on which book of The Bible you’re reading) in high regard.  The people whose work he lifted, which brought him the followers which led to the book deal and speaking engagements?  Too bad, shitbirds.  Maybe if you’d accepted Christ.

And so I went after him, right?  Just like The Actor and The Valedictorian.  I mean, if you’ve read this far, you’ve obviously surmised that the memory of when I chose, against all sensations to the contrary, to not steal material to further my career, has made me hyper-sensitive and mega-revolted and super-judgemental of those who do.  Add to that the memory of when I was so powerless, back there in Baltimore, watching that little goblin bum-rush his way to success on my friend’s inspiration and labor, and unable to do anything about it, has metastasized into an abiding resentment, a core-of-the-sun rage that I now indulge to overkill extremes.  I mean, it’s so obvious, isn’t it?

Nice analysis.

And dead wrong. 

The Actor, the Valedictorian, and now The Pastor were never my targets.  They were never my focus, never my concern, and didn’t merit a single calorie of heat.  I agree with Kelly – if any of these grubworms had temporarily crawled out of the darkness of their own uselessness, even on the backs of other people’s work?  They’d have been blinded by the expectations that sustained creation puts on the truly talented.  Indifference and failure was – and still is – waiting for them.  They’re not the problem.

All I care about is the profession I work in.  Stand-up comedy.  I also care about the continued, false perception the bulk of the general public has about stand-up comedy. And what I care about, most of all, is the maddening false perceptions that other people in the creative arts have about stand-up:

Comedians don’t write their own jokes.  They all steal.  All great artists steal.  You can’t copyright jokes.  It doesn’t matter who writes a joke, just who tells it the best.  Don’t musicians play other musicians’ songs?  There are only so many subjects to make jokes about, anyway.  I’ve seen, like, five different comedians do jokes about airplanes – isn’t that stealing, too?

Most people are not funny.  Doesn’t mean they’re bad people, or dumb, or unperceptive or even uncreative.  Just like most people can’t play violin, or play professional-level basketball, or perform brain surgery, or a million other vocational, technical, aesthetic or creative pursuits.  Everyone is created unequal. 

But for some reason, everyone wants to be funny.  And feels like they have a right to be funny. 

But being funny is like any other talent – some people are born with it, and then, through diligence and hard work and a lot of mistakes, they strengthen that talent. 

But some people aren’t born with it.  Just like some people (me, for example) aren’t born with the capacity to make music, or the height and reflexes for basketball, or the smarts to map the human mind and repair it.  I’m cool knowing all of those limitations about myself.

I’m even cool knowing my limitations within comedy.   I think, after nearly 25 years pursuing my craft, that I’ve become very very good at this.  But I’ll never be as good as Jim Gaffigan, or Louie CK or Paul F. Tompkins or Maria Bamford or Brian Regan.  Never reach the plangent brilliance of a Richard Pryor or the surreal mastery of a Steve Martin.  I’m okay with that.  I still get to be creative – on my own terms, and purely on my own work.

But why is it – and this only seems to apply to comedy – that some people so deeply resent those that can write jokes, can invent new perceptions of the world that actually make people laugh?  Resent them so much that they have to denigrate the entire profession, just so they can feel better about themselves?  Do they really think they’re less of a person if they can’t make up a joke, or be funny in the moment?  Why is it so crucial to them?  Is it because all of us, at some point of darkness or confusion or existential despair, were amazed at how absurd a thing as a simple joke suddenly lit the way, or warmed the cold, or made the sheer, horrific insanity that sometimes comes with being alive suddenly, completely, miraculously manageable? 